This post is to bring awareness to Banned Books Week. The United States was founded as a state where intellectual freedom for all was and is tantamount. That has not changed since the Founding Fathers built America. Unfortunately, more often than I’d like to admit, different individuals and groups attack that intellectual freedom and try to ban books they find objectionable—particularly unorthodox or unpopular content that is sexual in nature, anti religiously charged, or culturally challenging. The Founding Fathers knew the danger that existed in banning books. To give one segment of a population power to ban ideas and thoughts, to give that segment power over others who may not feel the same way, leads to fascism. They knew in a nation already as diverse as America that no one group should control the national collective—that way, no matter how small the instance, destroys liberty and freedom. Unfortunately, there are several fantasy novels that have either been banned or discussion of banning them has been raised. The Amulet of Samarkand by Jonathan Stroud The Amulet of Samarkand One of the most entertaining novels I’ve read in the last ten years has to be The Amulet of Samarkand by Jonathan Stroud. The Amulet of Samarkand, Book One in the Bartimaeus trilogy, is the story of Nathaniel, an eleven year old apprentice to a magician. But when he is humiliated by Simon Lovelace, a ruthless magician capable of anything, Nathaniel decides to speed up his education and learn one of the most difficult spells a young magician can learn—summoning a djinni. The djinni Nathaniel summons is Bartimaeus, one of the oldest and most powerful djin the world has ever known. And Bartimaus is not pleased. Not one bit. You see, the djin hate being slaves to the wiles and ambitions of humanity and do anything to kill their summoner. The apprentice orders his new slave to steal the rare and powerful Amulet of Samarkand from Lovelace, which sets off a chain of events that leads to the uncovering of a mystery, a rebellion, and an unusual friendship between a human and his djinni. The Amulet of Samarkand has been pulled from middle school libraries as well as recommended reading lists because of concerns that the book deals with the occult.  Really. The occult. It is said to be of the occult because the djinni are mentioned frequently in the Qur’an. Put a different way, they are akin to angels in Christianity, a non human creation of God. While the United States was founded as a nation where one religion is no more important or powerful than another, the Christian right wishes to see The Amulet of Samarkand banned because of its association with another religion. As I mentioned yesterday with Banned Books Week: The Golden Compass, to ban a book like The Amulet of Samarkand because of a difference in religion destroys a little bit of the very founding fabric America is made up of—and makes us like the very Iran those same people call evil. Luckily, the arguments to ban have not been given traction. Repeatedly, attempts around the country at banning The Amulet of Samarkand have failed. Numerous school boards and courts have found it is not a religious book but a work of fiction. It teaches witchcraft as well as a cookbook does. Not that that should matter. Even if it did teach witchcraft, this country was founded in religious tolerance not the religious intolerance so many wish to enact—and it is expressly important to treat all religions equally if they adhere to the laws put down by society. Second, I’ll talk about the book itself. As I said earlier, The Amulet of Samarkand was one of the most fun reads I’ve had the last ten years. Bartimaeus is, without a doubt, a great character. He is witty, smart, and carries sarcasm like a knife. The Bartimaeus books are heavily foot noted, the djinni revealing his thoughts about humanity and they are absolutely hilarious. Nathaniel is also extremely likable and has a wonderful character arc over the series. Stroud has great skill as a storyteller, weaving multiple events around one another until they reach the pinnacle of the climax, but its his ability to create the friendship between Nathaniel and Bartimaeus, two very different individuals having to reach compromise—that makes this a must read. As happens with most people who wish to ban a book, they only see one element within it and forget the wonderful qualities and morals in the rest. If you have not read the wonderful qualities in The Amulet of Samarkand and you wish to discover for yourself what the controversy is about—or if you just want to read a great adventure tale about a boy and his djinni click HERE to read excerpts. Happy reading! For all books!